+++
title = "The Impact of Trump's Tariffs on Brazil: Economic and Political Dimensions"
date = 2025-06-19
authors = ["Marco Túlio Vieira and Charles Jr"]
+++

The full impacts of the tariffs and the underlying trade war remain to
be seen, as well as the direct and indirect effects on Brazilian
workers' lives, employment, and livelihood.

<!-- more -->
{{ img(path="@/dossiers/tariffs/brazil_061925_media/image1.jpeg", 
alt="", caption="Brazil's steel and aluminum sectors could be among the hardest hit.", extended_width_pct=-1) }}

<br />

**By Marco Túlio Vieira and Charles Jr.**[^1]

<font style="font-family: Arial, sans-serif; font-size:55pt; font-style:regular; width: .80em; font-weight: 400; line-height: 52px; float: left; color:rgb(255, 254, 255); padding-top: 10px; padding-bottom: 5px; padding-right: 1px; padding-left: -5px;  margin-right: -30px; margin-bottom: -5px;">I</font>n early 2025, the Trump administration reignited global trade tensions
by imposing broad tariffs affecting several countries, including trade
partners like Brazil. The tariffs of 10% on most Brazilian imports and
25% specifically on steel and aluminum sent immediate economic and
political ripples across the bilateral relationship. According to U.S.
Census Bureau data, USA-Brazil trade in 2024 totaled $92 billion.
American exports to Brazil amounted to $49.7 billion (up 11.3% from
2023), while imports from Brazil, on the other hand, reached $42.3
billion (up 8.3%), resulting in a U.S. trade surplus of $7.4 billion.
The Brazilian government expressed its surprise and confusion at why the
country was being hit with tariffs, since the USA holds a surplus in
bilateral trade.
<br />
<br />
Brazil's steel and aluminum sectors could be among the hardest hit. The
USA is the 4th largest steel producer in the world. Brazil is currently
the 9th in the world and the 1st in Latin America (followed by Mexico
and Argentina). Data from the Brazil Steel Institute (a steel company
think-tank) shows that the USA is the primary destination for Brazilian
steel exports, accounting for 75% of steel exports in the 1st quarter of
2025, mainly semi-finished products. According to recent research,
Brazil supplied 60.7% of US steel plate import demand in 2024, with the
US importing 5.6 million tons of steel plate due to insufficient
domestic supply. Brazilian steel producers exported 3.4 million tons to
the American market last year. Despite these figures, the reports
estimate minimal impact on Brazil's GDP, although the steel sector may
lose up to US$1.5 billion in exports, and forecasts only a 0.01%
reduction in GDP and a 0.03% decrease in total exports. The reduction in
exports could lead to a 2.19% reduction in production, which could
result in layoffs in a sector that employed over 237,000 workers in
2023.
<br />
<br />

Steelworkers' unions, on the other hand, fear that all the talk around
tariffs is going to be used as one more opportunity to lay off workers
and increase the output per worker, turning the workplace into an even
more dangerous and sickening place, which has been a recurring situation
over the last decades. Steelworkers were once known for their
organization and protagonism in strikes and demonstrations,[^2]
especially during the redemocratization process. However, after the wave
of privatizations and market liberalization in the 1990s, workers and
their unions lost much of their power and ended up trapped in a
defensive position.
<br />
<br />
Steel companies in Brazil have always pushed for more tariffs to protect
local production, but mainly against Chinese exports, seeing cheap
Chinese steel as a threat. Some unions even endorse this position and
join the choir against the "Chinese threat," but companies that use
steel in their production process, like carmakers, have had success in
blocking any initiatives in that regard. The car industry has a
significant influence on the Lula administration, not only because Lula
himself was an autoworker, but because unions close to the government
represent workers in the sector, making the government give constant
support to car companies in order to try to prevent mass layoffs and
outsourcing. This strategy, however, has had little to no effect. Car
exports to the USA are minimal.
<br />
<br />
Major companies expressed concern following the tariffs, but maintained
cautious optimism, noting that American demand had not yet declined
significantly. However, uncertainty led Gerdau, a major Brazilian steel
company, to cancel studies for the implementation of a special steel
mill in Mexico. Gerdau's North American operation was responsible for
49% of the group's operating results in the first quarter.
<br />
<br />
The imposition of the tariff would yield a marginal impact on the United
States' GDP, amounting to -0.02%, while producing somewhat more
pronounced declines in investment (-0.49%), exports (-0.39%), and
imports (-0.66%), alongside an increase of US$7.3 billion in the trade
balance, a figure that remains negligible when juxtaposed with the
substantial merchandise trade deficit exceeding US$1 trillion. At the
sectoral level, imports of ferrous metals would decrease substantially
by 39.2%, while domestic production would experience an uptick of 8.95%,
with exports contracting by 5.32%. Moreover, other productive sectors
within the U.S. economy would also be adversely affected, with declines
in production in machinery and equipment (-1.1%), metal products
(-0.9%), electrical equipment (-0.6%), and vehicles and parts (-0.5%),
attributable to the increased production costs arising from the higher
steel prices. Correspondingly, exports in these sectors would register
reductions of -1.9%, -4.3%, -0.9%, and -0.7%, respectively, in addition
to a contraction in the ferrous metals sector's exports by -5.3%.
<br />
<br />
Agribusiness is currently portrayed as the most profitable and important
economic sector in the country, counting on the full support of the
government. Main products exported to the USA are coffee, cellulose,
and beef. Brazil exported 1.07 billion dollars of meat to Americans in
2024, a number that has been increasing over the last few years. The 10%
tariff on all Brazilian products could cause ripple effects
across the whole economy. However, the main consumer of Brazilian meat
and animal-derived products is China, so the main impacts will probably
be due to indirect effects on the sector. The orange juice industry
faces new tariffs estimated to cost exporters an additional US$100
million annually. In 2024, the most exported agrarian product (in total
value) was coffee, totaling US$ 2 billion. Then came meat and juices,
especially orange juice, and sugar cane products such as sugar and
ethanol.
<br />
<br />
As mentioned above, Brazil's main trade partner is China. The Asian
country imported 74.65 million tonnes of soybean; 6.47 million tonnes of
maize; 1.34 million tonnes of beef and 75,630 tonnes of coffee in 2024.
The tariffs impact the "soybean triangle" trade involving the USA,
Brazil, and China. Brazil had previously expanded its soybean exports to
China during the earlier rounds of the USA-China trade war.
<br />
<br />
Despite these setbacks, most newspapers state that Brazil might
paradoxically benefit from global trade realignment. The story they are
trying to sell is that Brazilian companies should try to leverage their
exports both to the USA, since other countries are suffering harsher
tariffs, and to countries that would have their regular trade with the
USA disrupted and may look for other sources of imports (one example is
the possibility of higher tariffs on EU iron and aluminum, opening room
for more exports to the USA). The steel industry wants to expand exports
to India. Mainstream economists and the government alike also believe
that Brazil could attract new foreign investments from countries and
companies trying to diversify their portfolio. So far, the Lula
administration hasn't put out any plan regarding promoting exports,
curbing imports, or attracting investments. The federal government seeks
to establish stronger ties with countries from the BRICS bloc, as well
as to strengthen Mercosur and to reach a long-postponed trade agreement
with the European Union. This often falls under the rhetoric of moving
away from American imperialism (and the hegemony of the dollar) and
establishing South-South agreements in order to empower the Global
South. In the early 2000s, the so-called commodities superboom allowed
the government to collect more taxes (even after all the fiscal benefits
given to companies) and use part of this revenue to expand social
security networks and direct cash transfer programs to the poorest
population. The government has been trying to portray the economic
bonanza of the first Lula presidency as what the population should
expect for the future, but so far only its closer allies believe in such
nostalgic feelings.
<br />
<br />
An economic risk, however, is that products which would otherwise be
directed to the USA end up in the Brazilian domestic market, stirring
competition, as illustrated by the footwear and garment industries.
<br />
<br />
Brazil's major exports to the United States encompass a diverse array of
commodities and manufactured goods, reflecting both the strengths and
the structural dependencies of the Brazilian economy. Among the most
prominent items are crude petroleum and derivatives, underscoring
Brazil's significant role as a key supplier of raw materials to global
energy markets. According to the U.S. Census Bureau, Brazilian exports
to the U.S. totaled approximately US $42.3 billion in 2024, representing
around 2.2% of Brazil's gross domestic product, and highlighting the
substantial yet relatively modest importance of this bilateral trade
relationship within Brazil's overall export portfolio (U.S. Census
Bureau). Notably, beef exports to the U.S. surged by 303% in the first
four months of 2025 compared to the same period in 2024, with the U.S.
accounting for 15% of Brazil's total beef exports during this
timeframe.[^3] Additionally, Brazil's advanced aerospace sector
contributed significantly through the export of aircraft and parts,
largely driven by Embraer's production capacity.
<br />
<br />
Agricultural exports, particularly coffee, beef, and orange juice,
reinforce Brazil's enduring role as a leading agribusiness exporter and
underline the country's reliance on primary commodities as a principal
source of foreign exchange. Conversely, U.S. exports to Brazil are
dominated by higher value-added manufactured goods, including refined
petroleum, machinery, aircraft, and chemical products, reflecting
Brazil's dependency on imports to sustain its industrial base and
technological advancement. This trade dynamic accentuates the country's
subordinate position in global trade hierarchies, as Brazil exports
predominantly raw materials and imports more sophisticated industrial
products, a configuration that perpetuates its vulnerability to
fluctuations in commodity prices and global demand. Politically and
economically, this asymmetry exposes Brazil to external shocks and
constrains its industrial development, reinforcing its role as a
supplier of commodities within the global capitalist system. The
bilateral trade relationship, while significant, thus embodies the
structural limitations of Brazil's export-led growth model and
complicates any narrative that portrays Brazil as a potential "winner"
in the context of global trade realignments triggered by measures such
as the Trump administration's tariffs.
<br />
<br />
Broader commodity price volatility and global investor caution could
create secondary effects, especially if China's GDP were to shrink as a
result of the more punitive tariffs, thus having indirect ramifications
on exporters dependent upon it.
<br />
<br />
There are also concerns about global food security, since new trade
barriers, including those involving Brazil, pose risks to the stability
of global agricultural supplies, exacerbating vulnerabilities in food
systems already stressed by climate change and conflicts.
<br />
<br />
Though criticism of Brazil's commodity export-dependence is not new,
being conducted by sectors both within and outside the government that
still believe in a developmental path for the country, the trade wars
reveal the structural limitations of the export-led growth model,
focused mainly on primary sector products like iron and steel, iron ore,
and agricultural products. The dependency on certain commodities leaves
the country vulnerable to shifts in global capital and trade policies,
challenging any narrative that portrays Brazil merely as an
opportunistic "winner" in global realignments.
<br />
<br />
President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva was vocal in condemning the U.S.
tariffs, describing them as harmful to the global economy. Brazilian
lawmakers quickly passed the Trade Reciprocity Law, authorizing
proportional retaliatory measures even if they contravened World Trade
Organization[^4] guidelines. At the international level, the Brazilian
government coordinated diplomatic efforts within an expanded BRICS bloc.
Although no joint statement was achieved, Brazil reiterated its
opposition to protectionism and reaffirmed its commitment to
multilateral trade.
<br />
<br />
However, the government's approach is trapped within the logic of
international capitalism. Simply diversifying partners or defending
Brazil's "national interest" through better trade terms fails to
address the deeper problem: Brazil's position in the global economy as a
provider of cheap labor and raw materials remains structurally
unchanged. Such strategies often reproduce the same dependency patterns
under new configurations. Trade diversification does little to
emancipate Brazil from global capitalist hierarchies. Unions and
moderate left-wing parties are fast to point out this issue, however
most of them are trapped in their support of the government and the
maintenance of such a position by the fear of a growing right-wing
movement and its chances of returning to the presidency.
<br />
<br />
It is true that there was some growth in the Brazilian economy in the
last few years, and that the country is positioned as the 10th largest
national economy. Unemployment reached the lowest level since 2012,
being around 6.6%.
<br />
<br />
Successive governments since the military dictatorship tried to pursue a
more autonomous economic growth model, and in the beginning of the 21st
century Brazil could be seen as a minor imperialist power, with
companies expanding to African and Latin-American countries. The crisis
in the 2010s certainly imposed a setback on these aspirations.
<br />
<br />

Brazilian trade unionists, particularly from the Central Única dos
Trabalhadores (CUT), have actively opposed the tariffs imposed by Trump.
In a joint statement, leaders from major labor centers[^5] (including
CUT and Força Sindical, the largest ones in the country, respectively
left and right-wing) expressed strong condemnation of the 10% tariff on
Brazilian exports to the United States. They warned that such measures
would negatively impact production and employment, especially in the
industrial and agribusiness sectors. The unions supported Brazil's
Reciprocal Trade Law, which authorizes retaliatory actions against
countries imposing trade barriers on Brazilian products. They also
advocated for national policies to promote industrial growth and quality
jobs, and international cooperation through BRICS. At the end of April,
they delivered a document to President Lula outlining their key demands
at the moment, going beyond the impacts of tariffs. Four demands stand
out: a reduction in working hours without a reduction in wages; an end
to the 6-day workweek (known as "the 6x1 scale"); exemption from income
tax for those earning under R $5,000 (US $875) a month and harsh
taxation of the super-rich.
<br />
<br />
The full impacts of the tariffs and the underlying trade war remain to
be seen, as well as the direct and indirect effects on Brazilian
workers' lives, employment, and livelihood. We were not able to find any
evidence of major protests or radicalized actions. The only response
that is more visible is the one given by the bureaucratic leadership of
trade unions, mostly aligned with the federal government and not willing
to disrupt the economy due to fears of contributing to the rise of the
far-right political forces. So, whatever the impacts may be, there are
currently no above-ground preparations to face them besides calling for
support to the federal government and lobbying politicians, while
hopefully expecting companies to "honor their part of the deal," thus
protecting jobs, wages, and working conditions. This is the current
situation of the Brazilian so-called left. There was also no information
about autonomous workers' actions, so either they were too small and
local, or they really haven't happened yet.
<br />
<br />
Workers in Brazil have been in a precarious position for over a decade,
with most strikes and demonstrations being reactive, usually against
cuts in rights or wages. The informal sector has grown significantly,
reaching officially 31% of the employed workforce in 2024, according to
data from the federal government. The current unionization rate is the
lowest on record, a little above 8% and many workers distrust the large
bureaucratic unions. Economic growth after the pandemic has been small
and slow, but companies have successfully pushed any losses to workers
in order to keep their profits. Struggles are usually fragmented and
dispersed, the last massive demonstrations were the ones in 2013, the
same year when strikes peaked. Autonomous workers' activities are
severely needed to break away from reformist left-wing organizations and
to surpass the numbing influence of the government and its allies. Many
workers turn to the right-wing as a way of breaking with the status quo,
strengthening the far-right.
<br />
<br />
The effects of Trump's policies have not yet been felt. It is possible
that the situation will get even worse for workers and poor people. The
cost of living keeps rising, despite price reduction in certain
products. Government initiatives trying to address this issue have had
little to no effect. Increases in wages were small in the last few years
and continue to shrink or even to turn into an effective reduction due
to inflation.
<br />
<br />
It is difficult to predict anything in such a muddy and uncertain
situation, but the social tension is reaching a breaking point. The next
months will be decisive and the government has little room for
maneuvering. It is possible that workers take to the streets. Some small
but independent organizations are constantly trying to promote
demonstrations (the ghost of 2013 still haunts the minds of many people,
both left and right-wing), although with no success. As an old labor
activist once said, many things can happen, even nothing at all.
<br />
<br />
We will be closely watching the social tensions, the economy and how
workers position themselves.

> Marco Túlio Vieira and Charles Jr. are communist writers based out of Brazil.

[^1]: The authors are activists and independent researchers based in
    Brazil.

[^2]: One example is the 1988 CSN strike, when steelworkers occupied the
    steel mill demanding better working conditions and higher wages.
    They were severely repressed, and 3 workers were killed. Important
    strikes occurred in the sector during the military dictatorship, in
    1968 and 1978.

[^3]: S&P Global.

[^4]: The same WTO that accepted the USA complaint against the Brazilian
    government stimulus policy for the car sector in the late 2010s.

[^5]: Brazilian trade union structure comprises unions (municipal
    level), federations (state level) and confederations (national
    level), usually according to sector or activity. This dates back
    from the nationalist Vargas dictatorship in the 1930s. The centers
    are a late addition, and act as a political representative of
    broader workers' interest, being officially included in the labor
    legislation in 2010 by the Lula administration.
