+++
title = "TRUMP II: Trade War Gone Global"
date = 2025-06-02
+++

In this first contribution to Heatwave, Chuang responds to questions about the global impacts of the latest rounds of American tariffs. The full overview of this inquiry, with responses from comrades across several countries, will be printed as a dossier called *Madness and Capitalist Civilization: International Perspectives on the MAGA 2.0 Tariffs*, and included with Heatwave's second issue. 

<!-- more -->
{{ img(path="@/dossiers/tariffs/chuang_060225_media/chuang_060225.jpg", 
alt="", caption="China produces around 1.2 billion umbrellas per year, 900 million of which are exported, with the U.S. as the largest buyer.", extended_width_pct=-1) }}

<br />

**By Chuang[^1]**

<font style="font-family: Arial, sans-serif; font-size:55pt; font-style:regular; width: .80em; font-weight: 400; line-height: 52px; float: left; color:rgb(255, 254, 255); padding-top: 10px; padding-bottom: 5px; padding-right: 5px; padding-left: -5px;  margin-right: -5px; margin-bottom: -5px;">T</font>rump's trade war is back &mdash; bigger, louder, and somehow even dumber.
Some say it's different this time. But like most sequels, the plot is
familiar. The characters are worn out. The filmmakers seem determined to
shoot the same scenes over and over again. How does it end? Probably a
hell of a lot like the original. While in *Trump I*, he fired shots at
big trading partners like China and Europe, in *Trump II*, he's opened
fire on the global order itself, and this time, the system shoots back.
<br />

# Trade war déjà vu all over again

Flashback to *Trump I.* In 2018, the administration launched a barrage
of tariffs on China, claiming it would curb years of Chinese "abuse" of
American workers. Beijing hit back more narrowly and cautiously, and the
whole thing dragged out into grinding negotiations. In January 2020, the
"Phase One" deal was signed, with China pledging to ramp up purchases of
U.S. goods, in an attempt to appease one of the central tenants of
Trumpian trade theory: buy American. A "Phase Two" deal was teased but
never materialized. What happened in the aftermath? The U.S. trade
deficit with China dipped briefly\... then climbed right back up by the
time Biden took office in 2021, just as the pandemic scrambled global
trade flows across the board. Biden, for his part, quietly kept most of
Trump's China tariffs in place, signaling continuity rather than
reversal. In sum, *Trump I* ended with a whimper: two underwhelming
deals, a handful of factories dubiously "reshored" (mostly in press
releases), farmers were given bailouts, and the trade deficit barely
budged. In the end, the battle lines returned almost exactly to where
they'd started.
<br />
<br />
As the opening scenes of *Trump II* pan over the smoldering American
wasteland, we can expect more of the same: loud threats, vague hopes of
new deals, modest tweaks in purchasing patterns, and at best a marginal
dent in what remains a yawning U.S.-China trade deficit. But this time,
Trump is bucking harder, against not just China, but the global economic
system itself. He's testing its limits, lashing out in every direction,
and ruffling the feathers of certain functionaries of global capital.
Still, unless he actually breaks something, like triggering financial
contagion, or pushing the "big red button," the system will, once again,
absorb the shock and buck back.
<br />
<br />
Trump already got a small taste of that after he fired the opening shots
on "liberation day": markets took a downward turn and deficits widened,
until he of course blinked, softening tariff threats and promising to
settle the turbulent macroeconomic waves with a series of trade deals.
But the global relations of production cannot be remade overnight,
either by raising trade barriers or any number of "buy American" deals.
You can't just slap a tariff on a washing machine and expect
world-spanning supply chains, built over the course of decades, to
simply reverse their currents on command.
<br />

# The soybean saga

In *Trump I*, much of the action centered on the saga of the soybean.
After the initial tariffs were levied, China slapped retaliatory tariffs
on U.S. soybeans and dramatically cut purchases... at first. Imports
from Brazil surged, with Brazil supplying as much as 82% of China's
soybeans in 2018, while U.S. market share collapsed. But that wasn't the
end of the story. American soybeans didn't just vanish. They were
rerouted to other markets like Mexico, Egypt, and Southeast Asia, often
at lower prices. China, meanwhile, still needed soybeans to feed its
massive pork industry, and eventually resumed some purchases from the
U.S., tariffs and all, especially during off-season periods when
Brazilian supply was low.
<br />
<br />
The basic structure of global trade didn't collapse. Rerouted materials
flowed in the same general direction, sold by the same consortiums of
established firms and bought by the same customers, only with more
middlemen. The real result was a global game of musical chairs, not a
revolutionary decoupling. The "[soybean
triangle](https://farmdocdaily.illinois.edu/2024/02/the-united-states-brazil-and-china-soybean-triangle-a-20-year-analysis.html)"
between the U.S., Brazil, and China proved remarkably resilient &mdash; proof
that deep supply chains and agricultural dependencies aren't undone by a
few press conference threats and tariff hikes. Life went on. Chinese
workers paid more for pork. Americans paid more for electronics. The
world economy adjusted, because that's what it does.
<br />
<br />
The production networks that power "Chimerica" took at least thirty
years to build. Factories have been fine-tuned to serve foreign markets.
Buyers and suppliers have developed trust, contracts, and logistical
pipelines that can't be easily liquidated by executive order.
<br />
<br />
In the present sequel, then, we can assume that Trump will most likely
settle &mdash; just as he did last time &mdash; for a modest uptick in purchases and
prices by China and allies, hammered out through a series of Mar-a-Lago
accords. The script will likely follow the tariff regime laid out by
advisor Stephen Miran, neatly sorting allies and adversaries into
different \"buckets\" defined by their level of market access (and
perhaps even security arrangements) &mdash; with China dumped into the most
punitive one, of course.
<br />
<br />
Ultimately though, the real drama of the trade wars does not play out
among cargo containers, but in the underlying forces that make them
move, including the dollar-based financial currents that pull goods
across the globe, the grinding conditions of labor that keep them
flowing, and the thin profit margins that keep the whole system afloat.
These are the deep mechanics of the system, and when pushed hard enough,
they push back.
<br />

# Can China wage-hike a trade war away?

Still early in the first act, the stutter of initiated, paused,
reinitiated, and paused-again tariffs are adding instability to China's
already shaky economy. Chinese exports are nonetheless still landing in
the U.S., though at a higher price, or flooding into alternative markets
in Europe or Southeast Asia. So far, the tariffs have again exerted no
real impact on the basic structure of global trade.
<br />
<br />
The turbulence still matters, however, especially for workers. Even a
modest downtick in China's export engine threatens the livelihoods of
the millions who depend on its relentless churn. As the *Wall Street
Journal* [reports](https://archive.ph/OaxDM#selection-2787.0-2803.300),
exports make up about 13% of China's GDP, and exports to the U.S. alone
account for nearly a quarter of that, representing close to 3% of
China's entire economy. Analysts now expect China's exports to the U.S.
to take a major hit, and China's total exports to fall by as much as 10%
this year. While that might not seem like much, this blow will also land
in the labor market: tariffs could put up to 15.8 million Chinese jobs
at risk across the manufacturing, logistics, raw materials, and
financial sectors. This is in addition to a slow wave of bankruptcies in
the manufacturing sector over the past several years &mdash; leading to an
uptick in defensive strikes and labor arbitration cases &mdash; and
historically high unemployment rates, especially among youth just
entering the workforce.[^2]
<br />
<br />
Another proposed solution for absorbing the output of China's vast
export-oriented industrial base is to redirect it inward, to the
domestic market. The mounting threats to China's export engine have
reignited calls, both inside and outside the country, for a
long-discussed macroeconomic reform: boosting domestic consumption.
While this may sound absurd given the sheer scale of China's export
capacity, it is precisely what many policy wonks have been calling for.
For some Chinese analysts, boosting domestic consumption would mean that
China's economy would become less reliant on foreign markets. Foreign
capital also hopes for China to domestically "consume away" at least a
portion of the products that it normally manufactures for export. Some
even claim that such a shift would result in Chinese wage growth and
further crack open Chinese markets to foreign investment as well as
products (from European cheese and wines to American airplanes and TV
shows), at the expense of Chinese producers, thus putting more money
into the hands of western industry.[^3]
<br />
<br />
But even the experts know this is a pipe dream that has never come true,
despite years of promises.[^4] Meaningful increases in household
consumption would require seismic structural shifts like raising wages,
expanding social security, and dismantling the vast financial
infrastructure built up around producer-friendly policies. But those
changes would gut profit margins and risk causing countless (already
struggling) firms to go belly-up. Profit rates have been falling both
across the Chinese economy as a whole and within the industrial sectors
specifically since the early 2010s. The decline has been particularly
sharp in sectors like garments, for example, resulting in a
near-continuous stream of offshoring for the last decade. In more
difficult-to-relocate sectors like electronics, cutthroat competition
has led profitability to drop to an all-time low. Meanwhile, in sectors
like steel, many firms (whether nominally state-owned or private) have
only been kept alive through subsidization and targeted purchase
agreements.
<br />
<br />
As a result, implementing the sort of social policies necessary to
elevate consumption would therefore require both an impossibly massive
stimulus to prevent bankruptcies, and the rapid creation of offshore
supply chains through direct investment on the part of Chinese firms,
capable of feeding newly-cheapened consumer goods back into the Chinese
market. There is, however, no short-term fix, and even this long-term
structural transformation would be an enormous risk, likely slowing
growth and generating new forms of social instability.[^5] Ultimately,
it is more likely that the state would buy excess capacity off of firms
(something it's [already done for
years](https://www.reuters.com/article/us-china-steel/chinas-sangang-buys-steel-capacity-with-eye-toward-bolstering-output-idUSKCN1NO14N/)
with its excess capacity in the steel industry) before pushing for
widespread and substantial wage increases.
<br />
<br />
As a case in point, China is currently drafting its 15<sup>th</sup> Five-Year
Plan. Looking back at the 13<sup>th</sup> Plan (2016-2020), the administration
was already pledging to balance imports and exports, a move hailed as a
pivot toward more sustainable, consumption-driven growth.[^6] Nearly a
decade later, however, the export gap has only widened. The domestic
market remains incapable, in its current state, of absorbing export
volumes, and media fantasies about redirecting goods inward mostly
ignore the basic math.
<br />
<br />
Let's take a look at umbrellas. Those bound for export leave Chinese
ports at an average valuation of \$3 to \$4 USD per umbrella (21-29
yuan),[^7] while the average umbrella sells from the factory to domestic
wholesalers at around 10 yuan.[^8] China produces around 1.2 billion
umbrellas per year, 900 million of which are exported,[^9] with the U.S.
as the largest buyer.[^10] For reference in term of China's economy as a
whole, total export size is equal to roughly half of household
consumption per annum.[^11]
<br />
<br />
No one, not even Trump, is suggesting that China should stop selling to
the world. However, despite years of official rhetoric about rebalancing
the economy toward domestic consumption, the scale of China's export
sector makes any serious change of direction extraordinarily difficult,
especially at this precarious moment in history. Even substantial gains
in household spending wouldn't come close to replacing the demand
currently supplied by global markets. China's economic rise remains
fundamentally dependent on foreign buyers, and above all, on the
developed world's willingness to continue buying Chinese goods. Trump
can rage against the imbalance all he wants, but at best he'll extract
minor concessions, a few symbolic purchases of American goods, and a new
round of made-for-TV promises.[^12]
<br />

# Sink or serve

The trade war will likely spark a new wave of strikes and worker unrest
in China, if it
[hasn't](https://x.com/YesterdayBigcat/status/1915606550393348420)
[already](https://x.com/whyyoutouzhele/status/1917636270962180447). But
the impact won't be limited to Chinese labor. We should also expect it
to accelerate firms' plans to diversify their supply chains across Asia,
with new hubs in Vietnam, Indonesia, and even India. As a result, new
strike waves among the younger generation of workers will follow, just
as they followed similar waves of industrial relocation throughout the
20<sup>th</sup> century in places like Italy, South Korea, and of course mainland
China itself. But these are not overnight shifts. They unfold slowly,
like a changing tide carving new contours into an old shoreline.
Similarly, there is no guarantee that even these "friendshoring" fixes
will be seen as acceptable within an increasingly volatile political
environment &mdash; as when Apple's pivot toward
[India](https://archive.ph/ORnZv), driven by pressure from the Trump
administration as early as 2016, was then personally criticized by Trump
for the decision in 2025, who told CEO Tim Cook outright: "I don't want
you building in India."[^13] The overall structure of global production
may remain largely intact, but the fault lines are widening.
<br />
<br />
At the same time, as China\'s economic situation worsens, the Chinese
proletarian condition looks similar that in the U.S., though perhaps
unfolding at a faster rate: meaningless service jobs and isolated lives
with little hope for children, family, or community. No future. When
China\'s official urban youth unemployment
[rate](https://www.reuters.com/world/china/chinas-youth-jobless-rate-rises-169-february-2025-03-20/)
recently hit 16.9 percent (far higher if ruralites are taken into
account), the government soon thereafter
[called](https://m.chinanews.com/wap/detail/ecnszw/heqztpw7830666.shtml)
for China\'s youth to throw themselves into volunteer work, and dedicate
themselves to Chinese modernization &mdash; without pay.
<br />
<br />
This is classic state paternalism, just one of the many \"fuck you\"
responses to the suffering faced by China\'s young people in recent
years, emerging from the terror of the pandemic only to find no solace
but instead an economic crisis awaiting them on the other side. During
the pandemic, Chinese youth coined terms like *neijuan* (内卷 or
"involution"), a crippling disgust reaction to the endless, competitive
hamster-wheel of labor, and *tangping* (躺平or "lying flat"), a passive
refusal to play the game. The government
[responded](https://www.rfi.fr/cn/中国/20211015-习近平诠释-共同富裕-促鼓励勤劳创新致富避免内卷躺平)
directly to the rise of these buzzwords in speeches and other public
pronouncements, and the reply was blunt: we're not doing any lying down.
Get up, and back to work. And yet the basic problem remains: what will
work look like for this generation as deindustrialization accelerates
and growth continues to slow?[^14]
<br />

# Against the tide of dollars

One of the strangest features of Donald Trump's aggressive break with
U.S. hegemonic norms is how it highlights the strength of the very
global system he claims to oppose. For all the talk of American decline,
Trump's own tariffs and threats have only underscored how deeply
entrenched the foundations of U.S. dominance remain. This is especially
visible in the role of the dollar. Global capitalism doesn't function
without a lead currency: gold in the 19th century, sterling in the early
20th, the dollar today. But this poses a conundrum: managing the global
currency means letting the rest of the world into your house, so to
speak. The U.S. opens its financial system  &mdash; its markets, its real
estate, its government bonds &mdash; to anyone with dollars to spend. That's
the cost of issuing the global reserve currency. It means accepting an
extreme degree of openness, legal convertibility, and capital account
flexibility that no other country is willing to stomach.
<br />
<br />
Certainly not China. Beijing will not allow foreign investors to roam
freely through its economy, buying land, companies, or debt at will (as
the U.S. more or less allows). The Chinese government wants trade
surpluses without the structural exposure that comes with being a global
financial hub. And that's why &mdash; even as Trump lobs tariff
threats &mdash; China's central bank
[continues](https://www.reuters.com/breakingviews/chinas-us-bond-holdings-are-going-nowhere-fast-2025-04-17/)
to quietly recycle its export dollars into U.S. Treasuries and makes no
move to offer the renminbi as an alternative reserve currency. Not
because it likes America, but because there's nowhere else to park that
kind of money safely, and at scale. Even if BRICS schemes up a new
clearing mechanism, it's little more than a small island in an ocean of
dollars &mdash; useful for managing some intra-bloc flows, but powerless
against the tidal pull of the global dollar system that still dominates
trade, finance, and reserves. The dollar system remains the only option
and, on top of that, Trump is out there to defend it. In fact, he
threatened [100%
tariffs](https://www.reuters.com/markets/currencies/trump-repeats-tariffs-threat-dissuade-brics-nations-replacing-us-dollar-2025-01-31/)
on BRICs countries when Russia floated a BRICs currency workaround to
bypass the dollar.
<br />
<br />
A [recent Chinese
study](https://www.chinaifs.org.cn/upload/1/editor/1722397223829.pdf)
projects that even by 2050, under a baseline scenario, the renminbi
might account for just around 10% of global reserves &mdash; still a distant
second to the dollar. [As of late
2024](https://data.imf.org/en/news/4225global%20fx%20reserves%20decreased%20by%203%20percent%20in%202024q4),
the dollar still makes up nearly 58% of global foreign exchange
reserves, with the euro trailing at around 20%, the Japanese yen at
nearly 6%, and the renminbi stuck at just over 2%, roughly on par with
the role of the Australian and Canadian dollars). In other words, even
after decades of talk about multipolarity and internationalization, the
dollar remains ubiquitous, leaving the world financial system swimming
in a sea of dollars for the foreseeable future. And, with no serious
alternative on the horizon, the entire global economy, including the
U.S. itself, remains at the mercy of the volatile tides of (largely
dollar-based) global currency flows. Even [Trump has felt
it](https://archive.md/TWiRC): when he started rattling markets too
hard, especially around the Treasury bond market, his wealthy allies
made it clear he was rocking the boat too much, and he backed off. Trump
may be back at the helm of the ship, attempting to turn the massive,
slow-moving vessel of the U.S. economy, but he is still navigating an
ocean of dollars that obeys deeper currents than any one helmsman.
<br />

# Flip the script

As in any sequel, the flashy advertising campaign showing a blitz of
action is usually a sure sign that the end product will overpromise and
underdeliver. For communists, there's at least one simple lesson here:
don't mistake elite chaos for transformative change. Trade wars may
shake the system, but they often end in half-measures and backroom
deals. Our work is elsewhere &mdash; on the ground, building networks of
friends and comrades across borders, and building a collective brain
bent on the creation of another world. As the system careens forward,
lurching from tariff threats to real war, we'll need more than
resistance: we'll need imagination. If Trump can try to rewrite the
global order from a golf resort, we can surely dare to imagine something
better. The future isn't theirs by default. It's a contested space, and
we should treat it like one.

> Chuang is a communist media collective based in China and several
> other countries that produces research, analysis, and translations
> focused on the development of capitalism in the region, its
> historical roots, and the revolts of those crushed beneath it.

[^1]: Learn more about Chuang at [ChuangCN.org](https://chuangcn.org/). Correspondance is welcome.

[^2]: Urban youth unemployment peaked in 2023 at roughly 20%. However,
    this measure did not systematically exclude all students, and it was
    discontinued in the summer of 2023, replaced in early 2024 by a new
    measure with more granular age brackets and a stricter exclusion of
    students. According to this new measure, the unemployment rate for
    non-students aged 16-24 initially declined and then began to spike
    again in 2024, reaching 18.8% in August of 2024 and then declining
    slightly to 16.5% by March of 2025. Similarly, the unemployment rate
    for non-students aged 25-29 rose from 6.1% in December of 2023 to
    7.3% by February of 2025. The data cited here are all from the
    "Urban Surveyed Unemployment Rate" (城镇调查失业率) monthly series
    released by the National Bureau of Statistics, available
    [here](https://data.stats.gov.cn/english/easyquery.htm?cn=A01) in
    English and [here](https://data.stats.gov.cn/easyquery.htm?cn=A01)
    in Chinese.

[^3]: *The Economist*, for example, has argued that Chinese government
    efforts to boost domestic consumption would spark renewed interest
    of foreign investors: "[Can foreign investors learn to love China
    again?](https://archive.ph/ZWcHF)" (March 27, 2025). Similarly, the
    European Chamber of Commerce in China sees increasing Chinese
    consumption as an opportunity for foreign brands, claiming that the
    inability to boost consumption "has become one of the most
    significant concerns for European companies, the consequences of
    which are now spilling out to the rest of the world": [European
    Business in China Position Paper
    2024/2025](https://www.europeanchamber.com.cn/en/publications-position-paper)
    (p. 13). Meanwhile, the Chinese government and official media also
    frequently tout the raising of domestic consumption power as an
    opportunity for foreign brands to make money, e.g. Fan Feifei,
    "[Consumers pull out all stops for high-quality, foreign
    brands](https://epaper.chinadaily.com.cn/a/202409/16/WS66e77dada310b6be0c6572fe.html),"
    China Daily Global (September 16, 2024).

[^4]: One of many examples dates back to the Hu-Wen administration over
    a decade ago: Kevin Yao and Aileen Wang, "[China bets on
    consumer-led growth to cure social
    ills](https://www.reuters.com/article/business/china-bets-on-consumer-led-growth-to-cure-social-ills-idUSBRE92402T/),"
    Reuters (March 5, 2013).

[^5]: It is for this exact reason that prominent party theorists such as
    Wu Zhongmin, an economist and leading professor at the Central Party
    School (where the highest-ranking government officials receive
    training), have constantly warned against the dangers of overly
    egalitarian spending on social services, advocating for leaders to
    avoid the path taken by Europe. For example, in one recent book,
    *Why is Social Justice Possible? Social Justice Issues during
    China's Period of Transition* (Springer Nature, 2024), Wu argues:
    "In certain developed countries in Europe today, egalitarianism
    manifests in the form of welfare systems that far exceed all
    reasonable limits" (p.299); and: "Even in developed Euoprean and
    American countries, the growth of public services has resulted in
    intractable social problems... During this era of public spending,
    the economic growth of European countries was far slower"
    (pp.368-369). If such a policy were to be pursued in China, Wu warns
    that "People will generally become apathetic toward labor.
    Ultimately, society will lose its vitality and potential for social
    development" (p.369).

[^6]: Increasing domestic consumption has long been a stated policy goal
    of the Chinese government, and the 13th Five-Year Plan is just one
    of many documents that reflect this intention. In that plan, the
    government explicitly mentions the objective of balancing imports
    and exports, though the language remains vague and flexible. It
    refers to "refining the mix of imports and exports" and "maintaining
    a basic balance in international payments," leaving the specifics of
    implementation open to interpretation. See: National Development and
    Reform Commission, [*The 13th Five-Year Plan for economic and social
    development of the People's Republic of China
    (2016-2020)*](https://en.ndrc.gov.cn/policies/202105/P020210527785800103339.pdf)
    (Central Compilation & Translation Press, 2016).

[^7]: "[2024年中国伞出口数量、出口金额及出口均价统计分析](https://www.huaon.com/channel/tradedata/1055044.html)"
    \[Statistical Analysis of China\'s Umbrella Exports in 2024:
    Quantity, Value, and Average Export Price\], 华经情报网 (February
    25, 2025).

[^8]: It is difficult to ascertain the factory price for umbrellas sold
    domestically, but this is our best guess. Exact prices and profit
    margins at each stage of the value chain, from factory to final
    retailer, are closely guarded industry secrets, and are lower than
    online list prices. This estimate of 10 yuan is based on a brief
    survey of factory wholesale websites like
    [Made-in-China](http://www.made-in-china.com/),
    [1688](http://www.1688.com/), and
    [Alibaba](http://www.alibaba.com/), supplemented by conversations
    with people in the import-export business. One of these also noted
    that many Chinese manufacturers operate on a crude "cost-plus"
    basis, typically pricing goods at cost + 5-10%. This approach,
    while often seen as rudimentary in more advanced markets, reflects
    the intense competition and improvisational strategies that define
    the cutthroat and volatile Chinese manufacturing sector.

[^9]: "[雨伞市场数据深度调研与发展趋势分析报告](https://www.sohu.com/a/780452192_121333014)"
    \[In-depth Research and Development Trend Analysis Report on the
    Umbrella Market\], 先略研究院 (May 21, 2024).

[^10]: "[Umbrellas in
    China](https://oec.world/en/profile/bilateral-product/umbrellas/reporter/chn),"
    Observatory of Economic Complexity (n.d.).

[^11]: According to World Bank data for 2023, China's household final
    [consumption](https://tradingeconomics.com/china/private-consumption-percentage-of-gdp-percent-wb-data.html)
    expenditure accounted for approximately 39.1% of GDP, while
    [exports](https://tradingeconomics.com/china/exports-of-goods-and-services-percent-of-gdp-wb-data.html)
    stood at 19.74%.

[^12]: Then there's the other half of the story, the financial side of
    trade, which often gets less attention. Profits from China's exports
    are funneled through Chinese banks, passed up to the central bank,
    and ultimately recycled into the U.S. financial system through the
    purchase of Treasury bonds and other dollar-denominated assets,
    completing a tightly coupled circuit of trade and finance that's
    been running for decades. It's just another front in the U.S.-China
    conflict that also implicates American bankers &mdash; one that Trump has
    tested before, with limited success. For now, however, the
    underlying structure of this system is likely to remains intact: the
    goods keep flowing, and the money returns to the People's Bank of
    China from the U.S., with interest.

[^13]: Arjun Kharpal, "[Trump says he doesn't want Apple building
    products in India: 'I had a little problem with Tim
    Cook'](https://www.cnbc.com/2025/05/15/trump-told-tim-cook-he-doesnt-want-apple-building-iphones-in-india.html),"
    CNBC (May 15, 2025).

[^14]: Similarly, the U.S. government doesn't give a shit about the
    general working conditions (or lack thereof) of the average American
    citizen. Trump and company have mustered every power of the state to
    slash domestic spending, and enrich the already obscenely wealthy,
    without raising a finger to change crises like precarity in the job
    market, housing, or health insurance. In fact, while *Trump II*
    began with the declaration of a "golden age" for the wealthy, his
    instructions to the American working class was essentially to [sit
    and
    wait](https://abcnews.go.com/Politics/trump-2-years-tariffs-result-american-manufacturing-boom/story?id=120486099)
    a couple of years after launching his tariff campaign for some great
    American manufacturing boom to materialize.
